[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What happened to me, in brief
from inside myself, was that,
after I took the psilocybin
mushrooms in 1961,
my entire understanding
of reality changed.
And it changed my entire life.
Basically, what
happened was that I
went from seeing a reality that
I had been trained to interpret
as reality as absolutely real.
I went from that to, in a
moment, moving through planes
of consciousness to understand
that the reality that I thought
was real--
like, Richard, come
down to reality,
as my father would say--
was indeed just one reality.
It was relatively real
instead of absolutely real.
What happened to me was
exactly what Einstein
did to Newton,
because Newton said,
these laws are absolutely
real-- mechanistic theory.
I remember learning
it in high school
as, absolutely, that's
the way the world is.
And then, basically,
Einstein said,
it depends on where you're
standing in time and space
and so on.
Now, I can't overestimate
the significance
of the shift of
consciousness that
goes from seeing
reality as absolute
to seeing it as relative.
It opens up a vast
terrain of possibilities.
It's what William James
said when he said,
our normal waking
consciousness is but one type
of consciousness, while
all about it, parted
from it by the
filmiest of screens,
there lie other types
of consciousness.
We may spend our entire
lives without knowing
of their existence, but
apply the requisite stimulus
and there they are in
their completeness.
Whatever their meaning, they
prohibit our premature closing
of our accounts with reality."
and I was basically thrown
out of William James Hall
at Harvard for arguing that the
intellectual analytic mind was
only one plane of reality,
because that was heresy
within that temple.
So opening the doors of
that, do you see what it did?
It cast me out from
the dominant theme
of our culture,
which is basically
a form of scientific
materialism.
It's rooted in the feeling
that technology and science
have paid off so
much in changing
the quality of our lives.
And those models, a
way of defining reality
and how to interpret what's
real, have worked so well.
We can't really question them.
The predicament is they
are relatively real,
but there are other realities
they have nothing to say about.
But science really
has a hard time
accepting there are
other realities it
can't say anything about.
It's like the issue of
consciousness versus the brain.
Science really has very little
to say about consciousness.
It's got a lot to
say about the brain.
So, since it's got a lot to say
about the brain, what it says,
then, is the brain
and consciousness
are really one
thing-- isomorphic.
But our technology doesn't
allow us to measure it
from the point of
view of consciousness,
so we'll work on the brain.
But we know, when your
brain is dead, you aren't.
Somebody that has seen
relative reality says--
like they do in India.
When you die in India, they
called it dropping the body.
What an interesting image.
Well, I'm going to
drop my body today.
Who's the I that's
going to drop what?
In the West, that's a
very peculiar expression,
because when your body
isn't, you aren't.
So it seems to me that
what happened to me in 1961
and that certainly
got reconfirmed
1,000 times over when I met
Neem Karoli Baba in 1967
was that there was a larger
context in which I existed
than the one that
I thought I did
and that everybody around
me was telling me I did.